---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

Enthusiasm for understanding how changes in the human microbiome affect health
has led to an influx of researchers who have little experience in documenting
and performing bioinfomatic analyses. Compounding this problem is that over the
past 10 years microbiome datasets have grown from hundreds to millions of
sequences. With the increased size of the datasets the complexity of the
analyses has also grown. Researchers that once used spreadsheets to analyze
their data now struggle to use command line tools. Traditional training programs
have not been able to meet the needs of these researchers and so it is essential
that instructional materials be developed to train these researchers on the best
practices for documenting and disseminating their analyses so that they can be
reproduced by others. The objective of this proposal is to develop a training
module that microbiome researchers can use to improve the reproducibility and
overall quality of their research. Aside from the general importance of insuring
that all research is reproducible, the significant growth of the community makes
it urgent that such instructional materials are developed now. The specific aim
of the proposed effort will develop a set of autotutorials to teach microbiome
researchers habits for engaging in reproducible research. This aim will be
achieved through an iterative process of development, evaluation, and refinement
using a wide network of microbiome researchers to assess the materials prior to
broader dissemination. The expected outcomes of the proposed modules are the
improvement of the reproducibility of research within the microbiome research
community, increased accessibility to raw original data, and a greater use of
literate programming tools for constructing manuscripts and oral presentations.
Furthermore, if it is possible to improve the reproducibility of the original
research, then it will be more likely that other researchers will use those
data, results, and methods to perform additional analyses resulting in a greater
understanding of the microbiome. Such a process is rare within the microbiome
literature given the vast size of many of these datasets. The long-term goal of
this project is to establish a broader community-supported resource devoted to
disseminating best practices in performing reproducible microbiome research.
Given the significant role of the microbiome in human health and the significant
growth in our understanding of how it shapes health and disease, improving the
reliability of the results form these studies will have a meaningful positive
impact. This project will yield a significant vertical step in the field because
it will put tools into the hands of researchers performing microbiome-focused
studies empowering them to perform sophisticated and reproducible analyses. The
approach taken in the proposed research is innovative because it represents the
first concentrated effort to develop formal, public, and open training modules
directed at the microbiome research community. Finally, we anticipate that the
materials we develop for the microbiome research community will be easily
disseminated across other bioinformatics research disciplines.   
